World Generation 

The following tables and charts were put together to help gamemasters who need a new world for their games, writers who want a kickstart to their setting and anyone else that wants to make a world but can't seem to pull the firmament from their minds. 

The basic assumption for each of the tables is a human/earth baseline. Depending on how much variation you want from that baseline, the rolling method will change as follows:
Miniature Divergence: 1d2 -1
Minor Divergence: 1d4 -1
Medium Divergence: 1d6 -1
Major Divergence: 1d8 -1
Massive Divergence: 1d10-1

If a table says to roll something or the table says to ignore the divergence roll, then follow the table's ruling. 

Climate
Whether it be the entire planet or a special region, the weather patterns and conditions of an area will have an immense impact on the landscape and socities of your setting. Fashion, agriculture, food sources and even architecture are a few of the aspects of society that are determined by the "local" climate. The climate regions listed below will have five "zones" within each option ranging from the polar weather patterns in the northern hemisphere down to the equator. To set up the southern hemisphere, cycle back from the penultimate weather zone to the first. 

Table 1: Climate (Random: Roll 1d8, note the result and find the corresponding number in the list below)
1: Standard (Ice Cap, Boreal, Temperate, Dry, Tropical)
2: Infernal (Temperate, Dry, Tropical, Torrid, Molten)
3: Sweltering (Boreal, Temperate, Dry, Tropical, Torrid)
4: Frosty (Hyperborean, Ice Cap, Boreal, Temperate, Dry)
5: Fimbulfrost (Frozen, Hyperborean, Ice Cap, Boreal, Temperate)
6: Molten (Torrid, Molten, Molten, Molten, Molten)
7: Ice (Frozen, Frozen, Frozen, Frozen, Hyperborean)
8: Custom Major (Select one of the climate zones and fill 4 of the 5 climate slots with it, moving up or down as necessary for the Equator)

Frozen: "Self explantory, absolutely frozen. The weather is rarely, if ever, above -200 and usually hovers around -250 to -300 though colder areas can reach -400F. This extreme climate zone cannot sustain life as we recognize it (outside of the tardigrade). The only landmarks are glaciers and ice."

Hyperborean: "This weather pattern is excessively cold, but not life here is not impossible though it does require effort, equipment and planning. In this unforgiving climate temperatures hover around -75F though it can dip down to around -150F, while the temperature can reach up to 60F rarely, it is in those "oasis-like" areas that communities grow. Winds can reach supersonic speeds across the icy terrain and polar vortexes can be pointed to as the culprits of the steep climate drops."

Ice Cap: "The ice caps of the north are surpringly more forgiving than the frigid south. Temperatures can drop to -50F, it hovers roughly around 32F. It is still cold but life can grow and find sustenance here. The growing seasons are short here and there are no trees on the tundra but grasses and moss grow, feeding the foundational herbivores of the life cycle."

Boreal: "The cold eases somewhat allowing for the growth of enduring evergreens, grass, large deers like the caribou roam in herds in temperatures that range from -50F in the coldest depths of winter to 77F in the heat of the summer. While not for the faint, this climate zone does provide sustenance and home for the hearty."

Temperate: "A wide range of temperatures and climates fit within this zone from dry summers with mild winters to hot summers that hoard the majority of rainfall with cold winters. There will be areas that have varying high and low temperature with rain and snow spread through the four seasons. Tornadoes, Thunderstorms, Monsoons; any of these phenomenon can be found in this climate zone with an equal variety of creatures. Agriculture is a big thing in this climate."

Dry: "The steppes and  plains. This climate zone is home to tall grass, shrubs and herbs with very few trees; the temperatures ranging from -4F in the deep winter to almost 90F in the summer. Bison, rattlesnakes, wolf packs and a number of rodents; these are a taste of the teeming life found in the dry climate zone."

Tropical: "Marked with a wet season and a dry season rather than summer and winter, the temperatures here are higher all year long on average hitting around 65F. While the temperature may not rise high, topping out usually just under 90F, these lands are humid and thick. It can make for uncomfortable living at times. The forests can be dense and hard to traverse or it can be more open with high amount of rain through the year but certain areas will be drought heavy with tall grass, shrubs and trees only growing near flowing water sources. Snakes, primates and large cats are found here with lions and zebras or crocodiles found in the drier regions."

Torrid: "A climate zone with hostile living conditions, little to no rainfall for long stretches of the year and land that has been worn down to sand by dry, searing winds. Only special plants and animals live in these conditions and growing food will require special planning and equipment but it is not impossible. The daily temperature is over 100F during the day, dropping to around 25F at night. Dunes of sand, rocks and occassional plant life adapted to this harsh climate identify the region."

Molten: "This climate zone is made of still molten, melted rock. Magma flows over itself churning and roiling as far as the eye can see. Occassional land pockets of active volcanos dot the region. It's not all smoke and ash though, there are sometimes storms of acid rain and volcanic smog to offer a change of pace. This region boasts temperatures over 150F and averages at 250F and is uteerly inhabitable by most organisms."

Populace
With weather and the rough outline of the natural environment out of the way, let's move on to who lives here. The tables in this section start with the basic assumption of a human, with the results making adjustments to that basic template to create species for alien or fantasy settings as necessary. Starting with the species Size, then moving to visual distinctive characteristics followed by special attributes and abilities as well as drawbacks or failings. Measurements using the imperial system are rounded up to the nearest unit for simplicity. While size is definite, the physical variations are examples to get you started.

Table 2: Populace Size (Roll 1d10, match the result to the corresponding number on the chart)
1: Nanoscopic
2: Microscopic
3: Tiny
4: Miniature
5: Medium (Base)
6: Large
7: Giant
8: Huge
9: Massive
10: Titanic

Nanoscopic: "Under 20 microns." 
Microscopic: "Up to 200 microns/0.2 millimeters"
Tiny: "Up to 60 millimeters/2 inches"
Miniature: "Up to 600 millimeters/2ft"
Medium: "Up to 3 meters/10ft"
Large: "Up to 10m/32ft"
Giant: "Up to 50m/164ft" 
Huge: "Up to 500m/1640ft"
Massive: "Up to 5km/3.1 miles"
Titanic: "Up to 50km/31 miles"

Table 3: Physical Characteristics
1: Head Variants (Extra Heads, Cosmetic Adornments, Combat Adornments)
2: Arm Variants (Extra Arms, Tentacles, Diarthrotic joints)
3: Leg Variants (Extra Legs, Predatory Legs, Ungulate legs)
4: Eye Variants (Insectoid, Predatory: Cat, Extra Eyes)
5: Ear Variants (Large, Pointed, Antennae)
6: Tongue Variants (Forked, Frog, Stinger)
7: Mouth Variants  (Multiple Mouths, Row of Teeth, Disposable Teeth)
8: Skin Color Variants (Dotted Patterns, Primary Color, Translucent)
9: Skin Texture Variants (Bark, Scale, Smooth)
10: Hand Variants (Extra Digits, Webbed Digits, Digging Claws)
11: Animal Form (Full Animal)
12: Extra Organs (Heart, Brain, Stomach)
13: Extreme Appearance (Ugly, Beauty, Feranthrope: Minotaur)
14: Non-Solid Form (Gaseous, Energy, Liquid)
15: Tail (Prehensile, Club, Balance)
16: Wings
17: Chymerid Form
18: Proxy Sense
19: Long Limbs
20: Fins

Head Variants
Extra Heads: "The creature has additional heads, each subsidiary head has enough intelligence to chew, speak and maintain any action it had already begun as well as look around (weakly). The creature can focus on any single head and make it the new primary head but without "additional brain" the other heads are pretty much on auto pilot."

Cosmetic Adornments: "Horns, Barbs, Swirling lights that rise from the scalp. Anything that makes the head look nice, different but regardless of the choice, it will offer no combat advantage to the species. Horns may be more like nubs, barbs might be brittle, swirling lights aren't bright enough to blind anyone etc."

Combat Adornments: "Horns, Barbs, swirling lights that rise from the scalp. While these adornments may not be the prettiest, they are suitable for self-defense. Horns may be long and sharp or blunt, ram-like swirls. Barbs may be like a crocodiles back, boney and hard. The swirling lights may leave targets stunned or blinded etc. Combined with Cosmetic adornments, they are functional in combat AND they can be used as flair to impress or look damn good."

Arm Variants
Extra Arms: "The species has extra extremities, a safe bet is one extra set of arms each time this characteristic is applied. Too many arms can get unwieldy though and it may become difficult for a single brain to allow for not only "higher" brain function but controlling so many limbs simultaneously."

Tentacles: "Instead of regular arms, the creature has tentacles which it can use to grip, swing from or otherwise interact with the world. Combined with extra arms, the creature can have both tentacles AND arms."

Diarthrotic Joints: "Every joint of the creature's arms possesses the ability to freely move in all directions."

Leg Variants
Extra Legs: "The species has additional legs, the safe bet is to grant one extra set of legs each time this characteristic is selected. Too many legs can fall on themselves and it might become difficult for a single brain to be in charge of "higher" brain functions an all limbs including any extra limbs and organs that species' already possesses."

Predatory Legs: "Members of the species can reach higher speeds when running than ungulates and other creatures but are less manueverable and require more effort to change momentum direction."

Ungulate Legs: "Members of the species can outpace many creatures but cannot match the speed, accelaration and deceleration of predators. They can, however, adjust with greater ease from one direction to another and outmaneuver chasers and obstacles."

Eye Variants
Insectoid: "The species is not able to see images with great clarity but can see a wide spectrum of light that the human eye does not pick up and can detect movement with almost unparalleled ease. In addition, the species can see in almost 300 degree vision, not quite a full circle, but close."

Predatory: Cat: "The species has poor vision close up but with about a foot of distance between themselves and what they are looking at, vision will improve. In exchange the species can see as well at night or at times when lights are low or dim."

Extra Eyes: "These creatures have additional eyes beyond the standard human pair. While a number is not assigned, it's a safe bet to say that each time this characteristic is applied to a species that they gain up to one additional pair of eyes."

Ear Variants
Large: "These ears are noticeable and out there, whether flared out like an elephant or drooping like a bloodhound. They are structured to catch and filter sounds, allowing the species to hone in on particular sounds and protect them from sudden bursts of sound cases of those with sensitive hearing."

Pointed: "The pinna of the ear comes to a pronounced point rather than rounding off. The restructuring grants the creature slightly enhanced hearing so they can pick up sounds from further away."

Antennae: "The species boasts antennae that serve as a truple threat of sensory input. Hearing, seeing, smelling; all can be done through the antenna. This does not elimiinate the existence or use of other sensory organs, just because the species has antennae does not mean they lack eyes necessarily but the antennae serve as the primary organ for these senses and the other organs serve as supplemental, weaker backup."

Tongue Variants
Forked: "The forked tongue allows the creature to supplement efforts by their nose to pick up on finer, faint odors. While it doesn't make them bloodhounds or supertrackers, it does give them a superior sense of smell to play with."

Frog: "The species has a retractable tongue that can extend 1/3rd the length of their body. Targets grabbed by this tongue have to resist being pulled at a speed that exerts 12Gs of force (meaning the target has to resist it's own weight multiplied by 12) and can possibly be knocked out from the force."

Stinger: "The species tongue ends in a sharp stinger like a bee or scorpion's tail, it can even be a syringe to inject targets if the creature has a means of producing poisons or chemicals. The tongue isn't any longer than a human tongue however so stabing the target will require some thought on the creature's part."

Oral Variants
Multiple Mouths: "The creature has more than one mouth, pretty self-explanatory. Each mouth has the ability to chew and bite and with practice and focus, more than one mouth can speak and act at the same time as another. Three or more mouths may require additional brains to control them and without an additional stomach, these mouths may not be able to digest anything it chews on."

Rows of Teeth: "Like a shark, this creature has rows of teeth in their mouth. These rows make chewing easier and while they may have sharper points than most teeth they are not fangs so they won't be serrating or shearing through skin and muscle with any more ease than a human mouth."

Disposable Teeth: "Following the shark idea, the creature does not run out of teeth and can sacrifice or lose teeth with no concern for gaps in their maw. These teeth are not much sharper than a human tooth. If the creature also has rows of teeth this process is bloodless, as teeth from a back row move forward to fill the gaps. If the creature doesn't have rows of teeth, there is a small spurt of blood as the new tooth pops through the gums."

Skin Color Variants
Dotted Patterns: "The creature's skin is colored by Ben-Day dot patterns of various shades."

Primary Color: "The creature's skin is colored in a single primary color (Red, Yellow, Blue) but has varying shades and hues."

Translucent: "The creature has see through skin of varying clarity ranging from milky or foggy to crystal clear. In some cases a lesser layer exists under the skin to keep the internal organs of the creature from being visible but this is not a universal hard rule."

Skin Texture Variants
Bark: "The species has the coarse, rough texture of bark from a tree and carries the same properties. This skin provides a very small level of protection against bludgeoning attacks and impact damage but proves useless against blades and sufficient force. This bark-like skin protects from dehydration and offers a very small level of protection from temperature extremes."

Scale: "The species has lizard-like scales from head to toe and may have ridges as well. These scales protect against dehydration and offers small levels of protection from cutting and stabbing attacks like the teeth and claws of predators."

Smooth: "The species has the look and feel of an uncanny material, sculpted into a humanoid facsimilie. The material may offer moderate protection from crushing, stabbing or slashing attacks depending on what the material is. For example, marble skin may protect somewhat against efforts to slash but it does not offer the greatest protection against a club meanwhile steel body protects from a number of physical attacks but not elemental or energy threats. Once the skin has been pierced or broken, the creature's insides are still normal and they will bleed as normal."

Hand Variants
Extra Digits: "The hands of this species has more than four fingers and a thumb. A six fingered hand to wield the sword that will kill someone's father perhaps or even more, though it is recommended that the species maintain less than 11 on a single hand."

Webbed Digits: "The fingers and thumbs of the creature are connected with an interdigital membrane. This helps the species interact with fluids, cupping it more efficently and moving through liquids easier."

Digging Claws: "The populace sport non-retractable, durable claws that are suited for digging through natural materials. The creature can move as fast as they can walk comfortably when digging but can go up to their running speed for bursting fits of digging that last for no more than six seconds at a time and require at least four seconds of break time between each burst."

Animal Form: "The creature does not start with a humanoid template but instead starts with an animal as the base form. This can be as innocuous as a sheep or as aggressive as a tiger. Keep in mind the base animal's height/length and how it fits on 'Table 2: Size'."

Extra Organs:
Brain: "The species has at least one additional brain, allowing the creature to multitask with ease. The other brains can control individal limbs or work on complex mental actions while the creature is immersed and engaged in other activities. If the creature has additional mouths, then the extra brain can communicate as a seperate entity."

Heart: "The species has at least one additional heart and cardiovascular network. The heart functions in all ways like the primary heart does however the heart does not need to be active all the time. If more than one heart is active at the same time, the creature is more alert and able to react to situations faster. The danger this creature faces is an exorbitant strain on their lungs with multiple hearts to keep blood oxygenated."

Stomach: "The creature's body has at least one additional stomach and digestive tract. If the creature has more than one mouth, those mouths can be connected to the supplemental digestive tract. Extra stomachs can be used in a number of ways by the daring and creative."

Extreme Appearance
Ugly: "The creature is hideous, not only horrid to look at but so offensive to the vision of others that they can shock, horrify or even temporarily blind those who view them."

Beautiful: "The species is stunning in beauty, nearly perfect to behold. Their beauty transcends race or sexual preferencee, it may even surpass species. This is not a form of mind control however, while many are willing to bend and obey for the creature, most people will not simply do what the species says. They are more inclined to want to please the creature and certainly will not die for them (without some other incentive or reason)."

Feranthrope: "The species is anthromorphic, an animal imbued with humanoid traits. This species is physically superior to the average human but also must tend to stronger instinctual pulls and demands such as mating seasons, hibernations and even territorial demands."

Non-Solid Form
Gaseous: "The species can enter into and maintain a humanoid shape through discipline and focus but in their natural state the creatures are gas and vapor. If dispersed, they can reform in time, anywhere from a day to a week, though species with regeneration can reduce this time down to days or even seconds. The gas is not poisonous or chemical unless the creature can also generate such effects."

Energy: "The creature can mold and shape intangible energies such as fire, ambient radiation, air or even light into a body but their natural state is sentient energy. The energies themselves can be harmful and while the creature can mold and shape these energies to coalesce into a form, this talent is not an offensive capability. The creature cannot increase or decrease the intensity of the energies either."

Liquid: "The creature is made of liquid; mud, slime, water or even acid. The liquid's properties remain the same and can be used creatively to attack or defend. If the body is dispersed with suitable force, the creature can reform in a day or up to a week. If the species has regeneration, the time can be reduced to days or even seconds. The creature cannot manipulate the liquid further than minor tricks and forming a body, nor can the creature increase or decrease the volume of the liquid that makes up their body."

Tail
Prehensile: "The species has a long tail, capable of being used to grab and swat targets like an additonal hand. If used offensively, the tail is lackluster. It is capable of grabbing and pushing but lacks the quick release power of a punch. The greatest advantage of this tail is that it is very manueverable and flexible, able to strike from around the creature or even overhead. This tail can assist somewhat with balace but it can also get in the way in times of stress or danger."

Club: "The creature has a tail that is rigid and thick, potentially ending with a large bulbous end. The whole tail is suitable for clubbing or bashing targets but mostly cannot be used for any other activity. If the creature has prehensile as well, then this tail is capable of attacks from a variety of angles with punishing power and can grapple with a respectable strength. The shortcoming of this tail is that it provides poor balance, potentially throwing off the creature if it attacks from a position of bad footing."

Balance: "The creature has a wide tail that is not very flexible but provides an amazing supplemental effort to balance. The species has great balance on all but the most trecherous of terrain and with focus they can overcome even the worst footing. The tail does not grab anything but it can be used to slam but it will be an unwieldy weapon."

Wings: "The creature has at least one pair of majestic wings that can lift the creature and keep it aloft. The flight speed is modest, equal to the creature's running speed, though additional wings will make the species a small bit faster."

Chymerid Form: "The creature is a mix of humanoid torso and animal legs. The legs do not have to be the "classic" Centaur, it can be any animal's legs."

Proxy Sense: "The creature can extend the range of thier senses because one of their sensory organs has a supplemental, external assistant. A ring with eyes encircling it or an automated drone that picks up normally inaudible wavelengths are examples of what the species can utilize to augment their senses."

Long Limbs: "The creature has limbs that are at least half as long as a normal humanoid's limbs. Arms that drag knuckles on the ground or legs that have two knees because they are so long. Even the neck can be used in this case such as a giraffe neck on a humanoid frame."

Fins: "The creature has fins that grow from their body to help them move swiftly and with greater agility when submerged. These fins allow the species to move at speeds comparable to an olympic runner when immersed in liquids. They need not be in water to gain this benefit though the fins grant them no protection if they are immersed in a fluid that they cannot normally withstand such as magma or acid."


Extraordiary Abilities
With the physical characteristics and the visually noticeable traits out of the way, the following traits will help to define what the species boasts as an evolutionary advantage. Whether it be tool use or supernatural abiltities, what follows will give the populace of this setting something extra to keep would be predators on alert.

Table 4: Extraordinary Abilities
1: Carrier (Plague, Insects, Harriers)
2: Enhanced Senses (Hearing, Taste, Sight)
3: Environmental Adaptation (Underwater, Subterranean, Aerial)
4: Expert Athelte (Climbing, Acrobatics, Swimming)
5: Alternative Mobility (Levitation, Flight, Swimming)
6: Sight Variants (X-Ray, Energysight, Darkness Sight)
7: Claw Variants (Sharp nails, Pincers, Retractable)
8: Gaze Variants (Paralysis, Petrification, Energy Blast)
9: Bite Variants (Fangs, Poison, Sleep)
10: Natural Defense (Thick Hide, Carapace, Exo-Skeleton)
11: Superior (Physical Strength, Social Guile, Intellect)
12: Legendary Atavism (Dragon, Fairy, Giant)
13: Surge (Physical, Healing, Mental)
14: Adept (Arcane, Psychic, Ritual)
15: Quills/Barbs
16: Increased Speed
17: Extended Lifespan
18: Regeneration
19: Naturebound
20: Elastic Form

Carrier 
Plague
Insects
Harriers

Enhanced Senses 
Hearing
Taste
Sight

Environmental Adaptation
Underwater
Subterranean
Aerial

Expert Athelte
Climbing
Acrobatics
Swimming

Alternative Mobility
Levitation
Flight
Swimming

Sight Variants
X-Ray
Energysight
Darkness Sight

Claw Variants
Sharp nails
Pincers
Retractable

Gaze Variants
Paralysis
Petrification
Energy Blast

Bite Variants
Fangs
Poison
Sleep

Natural Defense
Thick Hide
Carapace
Exo-Skeleton

Superior
Physical Strength
Social Guile
Intellect

Legendary Atavism
Dragon
Fairy
Giant

Surge
Physical
Healing
Mental

Adept
Arcane
Psychic
Ritual

Quills/Barbs

Increased Speed

Extended Lifespan

Regeneration

Naturebound

Elastic Form

Populace Drawbacks
It can't all be power boosts and benefits. The species may have limitations that help to counterbalance the evolutionary advantages that they have developed over time. These drawbacks can also be taken willingly to "purchase" additonal extraordinary abilities or physical characteristics at a rate of one drawback for one abiltity/characteristic.

Table 5: Populace Drawbacks
(In addition to the drawbacks taken normally, additional drawbacks can be taken to apply an additional extraordinary ability or characteristic)
1: Decreased Lifespan
2: Missing Limbs
3: Brittle Bones
4: Impaired Endurance
5: Failing Valor
6: Debilitating Pain
7: Allergy
8: Environmental Sensitivity
9: Plodding Pace
10: Sluggish
11: Light Sensitivity
12: Enervated Form
13: Infirm
14: Stagnant Form  (No natural healing)
15: Extraordinary Ability Condition
16: Psychic Vulnerability
17: Bio-Chemical Dissipation (Bio-Chemical Vampire)
18: Elemental Suseptibility
19: Impaired Sense
20: Alternate Nutrtion

Decreased Lifespan

Missing Limbs

Brittle Bones

Impaired Endurance

Failing Valor

Debilitating Pain

Allergy

Environmental Sensitivity

Plodding Pace

Sluggish

Light Sensitivity

Enervated Form

Infirm

Stagnant Form  (No natural healing)

Extraordinary Ability Condition

Psychic Vulnerability

Bio-Chemical Dissipation (Bio-Chemical Vampire)

Elemental Suseptibility

Impaired Sense

Alternate Nutrtion

Location Scope
While the previous tables dealt with creation on the macro level, this table will direct focus towards a specific area. This smaller area will be the setting for the story that you will tell. The positive and negative events tables below will take place across this location creating or curing problems for the local populace for the duration of your tale. Please keep in mind that the community hierarchy is a gross oversimplification and not at all a real life portrayal of the truth.

Table 6: Location Scope (Roll 1d6, match the result to the corresponding number)
1: Hamlet (Two or Three Hamlets equal a Village)
2: Village (Two or Three Villages equal a Town)
3: Town (Two to Five Towns equal a City)
4: City (Three to Five Cities equal a City-State)
5: City-State (Two or Three City States equal a Region)
6: Region (Three of more regions equal a Nation)

Hamlet: A small settlement usually made of one extended family, often counting has less than 100 people. In the communal hierarchy, a single hamlet is the smallest community and two or three Hamlets combine to make a "Village". A single Hamlet will have the bare essentials for community and commerce; perhaps a store, natural disaster relief and peacekeepers. They may lack a central communal area such as a marketplace or church and still forage and hunt for food.

Village: A decent sized society made of more than one family and made of anywhere from a few hundred to a thousand people. The people here are most often stationary, practice primary industries like fishing or farming and have a communal center where people gather for social occassions and festivals. While larger than a hamlet, the village is still pretty small in the way of a community. Two or three villages can make a Town.

Town: A residential community that may have more than one thousand but less than one hundred thousand people. Clinics and schools as well as a "main street" where numerous markets are accessible . Most professions are tied to manufacturing resources brought in from villages into new products, trading those products to other locations and public service jobs that protect the people and businesses. Defenses such as sturdy, high walls are more common. Several Towns, roughly two to five, together form a city. 

City: A large, densely populated community with permanent structures and jobs that focus on non-primary industries. Providing housing, local transportation, sanitation, communication and utilities for it's populace, run by a myriad of administrators. Divided into districts that focus on particular industries and commercial needs, the cities dense population makes it easier for people to access goods that come from towns and villages as well as exporting those goods to trade partners and other cities. Cultures diffuse and mix as people travel from all over for exotic goods, unique services and specialized forms and higher levels of entertainment. Surrounded by lesser towns and villages to support it and feed resources into it, the city boasts upwards of three hundred thousand to just shy of one million people. If roughly three or five cities come together they can form a city-state.

City-State: This massive community can also be a called Metropolis. It is not only a city but a significant center of culture, economic and political power and influence. This is the capital of an area, an important hub for the entire region. The jobs found in a city are found here as are the lack of primary industrial focus. Settlers and colonizers will make their way from here to expand the reach of the metropolis. With a population of over one million people and potentially nearing three million, it requires extensive infrastructure and resources to maintain. Should two or three city-states come together, it is a region. 

Region: Multiple cities, towns, villages all bound together sharing one root culture, though some practices and beliefs may vary. Populations upwards of three to ten million people live within the socio-political boundaries of the region. Professions from all walks of life are available, while perhaps not within the capital, in some communal area within the boundaries. And while a region or even a city-state may be considered one and we do not delve into it here, three or more regions will make a nation.

Societal Distinctions
The particulars of a society gives it a cultural identity and these Tables 7-15 are here to help bring that unique identity to the forefront. The ideas below are not entirely defined because they are supposed to serve as prompts that a writer or game master can flesh out and fit to their setting. Ask why the people of your society behave this way and what are the consequences of following or disobeying these societal behaviors. Feel free to change the context of a prompt (ex: "A warrior's favored weapon is in all legal aspects their first child" can be changed to "A warrior's first armor is in all legal aspects their first child." Armor replaces weapon and roughly the same feeling is conveyed) if it will make the prompt easier to work with.

Table 7: Military Quirks
1: All fights between equals are assumed to be to the death. Surrendering places the loser and their immediate family in the service of the winner for two years.
2: A warrior's favored weapon is in all legal aspects their first child. For any subsequent children or descendents to claim an inheritance, they must defeat the warrior or a chosen champion who wields the favored, elder weapon.
3: All combat must be sanctified by a priest who serves as a referee. The church recieves a fee for this service and can claim the bodies of the dead. In some cases, the church will raise the dead and conscript them into the holy army, severing the raised from their old lives entirely.
4: One day of the week is so sacred and revered that it is an unforgivable sin to take a life on this day. Combat is permitted but should a life be taken, the punishment is brutally severe, no matter the circumstance and without exception.
5: Armor cannot be worn if it will hide a combatant's face.
6: A soldier cannot take the life of an animal, it is a disgrace to themselves, their weapon, their unit and their training. Only a hunter may kill a beast.
7: A single weapon, both deadly and exotic, is wielded by the military to take lives. Any other weapon they wield is to beat, humble or humiliate their opponent.  
8: The military's forces take the field dressed in make-up and gaudy medals that adorn their armor and uniforms.
9: The only protection that warriors wear are runes that tell their story and mark their glorious victories of the past.
10: A soldier can be called back from training and even the frontlines by their mother.
11: The military is trained in a "less is more" philosophy; their numbers are few but each individual soldier is much tougher than the average soldier. 
12: There is no standing military, the military is made of foreign mercenaries.
13: Killing on the battle field nourishes both the weapon and wielder's souls. Without it, one remains an empty vessel. 
14: Soldiers cannot go to war without an heir and at least one sibling.
15: Soldiers are first class citizens, earning top compensation. They are also afforded benefits and rights that other civilians do not get.
16: Soldiers that get the blood of their enemies on themselves must go through a purification ritual to be counted among their people once again.
17: The military forces live in a seperate sub-city and must hide their faces from civilians when in public.
18: The military is made of a select sub-section of society, such as orphans or bastards, and raised by the state to be soliders, advisors and guardians.
19: When joining the military, recruits agree to sign their body, even after death, to the state for research and experiments.
20: The entire nation recieves mandatory training from ages sixteen to twenty and anyone not among the elderly may be drafted to fight.

Table 8: Cultural Quirks
1: People may not speak to one another directly, they must speak through a proxy. To knowingly misrepresent someone's message is a cardinal taboo akin to cannibalism.
2: When emotionally overwhelmed, the people speak in a seperate language only used in those emotional moments. To outsiders it is gibberish.
3: Leaders are selected to greater council positions from eight to twelve years of age, lesser council positions from thirteen to eighteen and local leader positions from nineteen to twenty-nine. From the ages of thirty onward they are barred from positions of leadership but may take advisory positions.
4: Stories are a quantifiable and tradable form of currency among these people.
5: Without a certificate of graduation from advanced studies (high school equivalent), a citizen cannot be wed or hired as anything more than a trainee.
6: The laws of the society are revised every year according to the direction that a sacred animal travels during a ceremony celebrating justice.
7: If someone is unmarried after the age of thiry-four, they are banished from society.
8: Forcibly pouring honey on someone is a grave insult and will result in a duel. If the offended cannot defeat the offender in an honorable duel, they must remain in the service of the offender for one year and a day.
9: Unmarried men are permitted to carry weapons in public but cannot shave or trim their facial hair. Unmarried women that take up the soldier's life must shave their heads bald and grow a new warrior's mane.
10: The society refutes a commonly accepted event, phenomena, theory or persona; from denying the existence of wind to the death of a celebrity.
11: Outside of the ruling class, anyone eating meat must water fast for a week after the meal.
12: Constructs are afforded equal rights to bio-forms within the borders of this society though the rights of the living dead are still under debate.
13: Pets are so bound to their owners that they share a special language, can share extraordinary abilities, senses and can be counted as one person.  
14: The people of this society share a universal vice that can be used to manipulate or ruin them, though they hide it well.
15: Music, instrumental or lyrical, will evoke extreme versions of whatever emotion it attempts. Love makes them passionate, dirges may end lives.
16: The people believe that the founder of their society still lives but is in a deep slumber hidden from them and judging their worth as citizens.
17: Married men must walk in front of their wives and her immediate family out in public, during holidays they are forbidden to speak in public as well.
18: Ingesting pollutants (drugs, alcohol etc.) in a recreational manner is a crime and can result in forced binging, banishment or execution by overdose.
19: Ritual scarring indicates what caste a person is born into while temporary plant based tattoos indicate a person's current status wihtin the society.
20: Visitors are given a wreath of fresh flowers when staying within the society. They are forgiven legal indiscretions and given patient explanations of the laws. If they have been poor guests, the visitor is held accountable for all legal infractions and can be banished once the flower wreath wilts. Good guests remain forgiven for infractions in the past but held accountable for new crimes if any.

Table 9: Leadership Quirks
1: Once every seven years candidates for leadership gather together and in an olympic like competition of administrative duties prove themselves as capable leaders.
2: The word of performers carry so much weight that an endorsement from a hot star can almost guarentee a position of power while a satrical piece can almost ensure removal from an office or throne.
3: The leader must undertake a quest on behalf of the nation every three years. If they cannot complete the quest or are physically unable to undertake the quest, they must hand over power to their heir who must complete the quest to succeed the leader.
4: While people believe that they know who their leaders are, it is actually a secret power that steers the leadership.
5: Social programs have been set up that push funds from the top of society down to the bottom, making the rulers popular with the people but this is rapdily draining the society's coffers.
6: Guests of the leaders of this society can make declerations that carry the same weight as their hosts.
7: The ruling class are avid hunters and have placed limits and laws specifically to preserve animals they hunt and fit their hunting schedule.
8: The ruling class has created a sub-ruling class made of body doubles and relatives to supplement their power, enhance their reach and defend them. 
9: The ruling class go out into public appearances only on holidays and the start of new seasons.
10: At the start of the year a random member of the ruling class is stripped of their title and holdings and must live as a commoner for a full year. If they give up, they permanently lose thirty percent of their resources but regain their lost position. If they succeed, they are given all of their old resources plus an additional fifty percent added on and make a decleration that is usually passed into law.
11: When meeting face to face, the ruling class must wear masks as no commoner may view their full majesty.
12: The order of birth does not dictate inheritance. The Passing Cup, a tournament held by nobles, handles those matters.
13: Members of the ruling class enter a familial tournament every decade of the current leader's reign. Five winners are selected from the competitors. The first place winner is the new heir and may immediately attempt to claim power in a special election. The other four are given positions of power while the other competitors are banished.
14: The ruling class maintains three open seats on the ruling council at any given time that are available for purchase. Foreigners may purchase one seat per nation at thirty times the local price. Locals purchasing a seat may hold the seat for up to five years while foreigners must repurchase the seat every year.
15: Only the ruling class is educated in mystical arts and mysteries. Any commoner caught wielding these forbidden techniques is adopted by a noble family while their birth family is punished harshly.
16: The ruling class can only marry from within their society's populace. Any outside marriage and the offending noble must abdicate their position and will have to imbide a potent memory wiping potion.
17: Each member of the ruling class is guarded and accompanied at all times by a dangerous creature that they raise from its birth. When the animal companion dies, an annual day of mourning is declared.
18: When a member of the ruling class dies, any money in excess of what is spent on funerary ceremony is passed down to the commoners of their society.
19: The ruling class always die at the age of sixty five. The age of sixty four is spent putting their affairs in order before honorably ending their lives before the end of their sixty fifth year.
20: The ruling class has tied their lives to the health of the nation. As it grows strong and robust, so to does the noblitiy.

Table 10: Superstitions
1: Never allow a parent that has lost their child to look your child in the eyes or they will steal the child's soul and use it to bring a cursed clone to life.
2: A child cannot sleep away from their parents for the first three years of their life or an apparition will steal them and leave a shadow copy.
3: When a marriage ends each party must marry an animal to clear any curses or lingering negative energy from their ex. During the honeymoon, they must sacrifice their new beastly partner to the family of their ex-spouse. This will purify them and allow to remarry clean of any ill-wishes.
4: No one can be outside at midnight on the night of a new moon or they will disappear for one hundred years.
5: Before undertaking any major project, all people and tools involved must bathe thoroughly in alcohol and purified, holy water to banish all evil spirts and gremlins.
6: The firstborn of two firstborn parents will grow to be a criminal.
7: Should any but the enlightened ones ingest the sacred, forbidden herbs and plants they will suffer visions that will drive them to insanity and death. 
8: An item held in the possession of a person for more than a year becomes a part of their essence and a part of them.
9: If a person goes to bed three times with an empty stomach, on the third daym they will birth a famine spirit that breaks things and eats their essence. This ravenous spirit grows stronger if the being that gave them life dies of starvation.
10: The twin headed rose is lucky when plucked in the summer but can bring it's owner death if accepted in the winter.
11: If a threat is made against you, knock on bone to ward of bad luck and ill-intent.
12: An owl seen during the day means that a predator in the shape of a person lingers near.
13: A salamander tongue, removed from a male salamander by a pregnant woman, placed under the bed of a baby while it sleeps makes the child invisible to demons and protects them from nightmares until the tongue dries out.
14: If a criminal asks for forgiveness and is denied nine times, they will come back from the dead as a Hangman's spectre.
15: If a widow looks into her reflection within a fortnite of a spouses death, they may speak for one night with the departed but it will cost them one year of their life.
16: The number nine is unlucky, a gathering of nine invites the dead to join to round the number to ten.
17: Odd number groups are auspicious and blessed when bound together.
18: No man can kiss a canine, to do so invites the wrath of a Bloodwolf-an insatiable and unerring hunter who will kill him and his family. Only a cat, blinded by its mother, released at high noon can defend against and chase off this otherwise implaccable foe.
19: If you spill ground cinnamon, you must pour saltwater on it and sing a funeral dirge to avoid being cursed with bad luck.
20: The frostsnare butterfly boasts luxurious crystal latics wings that sound like rapping tapping on a snare drum. If it lands on you and plays a"solo", you have heard the Progenitor's medley and will be a parent soon. If it lands on you and is silent, it means death will touch your life very soon.

Table 11: Significant Landscape Features
1: The giant looming carved figure, shaped roughly like a beast of myth and legend, helps the local populace tell the passing of time and bleeds an ichor that serves as excellent albeit unstable fuel and fertilizer. 
2: The heart of On-Ten, a giant caldera to an active undersea, that is just above the sea level and the size of an island.
3: Forest Trees are massive columns that have entire forests growing within their inner walls, beneath the bark.
4: Tic Tac Torrents are twin jetstreams that rise up, arc and cross over twin descending waterfalls that falls from a mountain that stretches as far as the eye can see.
5: Season sprouts; plants that create seperate and suitable environment for locals. From grasslands to trees, the larger the Season sprout the wider it's area of influence and the longer this generated enviorment will maintain.
6: Eastern continental twin landmass in the sky, caught in the orbit of a suspended meteor.
7: Man's Might Mountain range: Mountains formed not by tectonic plates and earthquakes but people. 
8: Sanguine Sea: A sea where a maritime battle  was staged, the marines were taken by such bloodlust that no one survived and the sea has been blood tinged since.
9: Magma scabs: Craters where meteors hit with such impact that scars of open magma opened in the land but had a layer of oil and earth supercool quickly over it making magma pockets where torn earth can reveal active magma flow.
10: Tomb City: A specialized necropolis where only the chosen are allowed to be buried. 
11: Lightning Gardens: Ionic disruption caused by minerals that are cultivated to craft particular discharges of electricity, such as a tree shaped St.Elmo's fire.
12: The Hollow Hearld: A massive arc that was mostly taken apart to serve as the foundation for the first local colony. The unused parts of the shell remain as an impressive feat of ancient ingenuity.
13: The Immortal's Ring: A colosseum where legendary battles once took place regularly, the ground itself can raise the bloodlust of even staunch pacifists. Sometimes the echoes of combat still resound from the "ring" and new trophies will appear to line the wall. 
14: Terran crown: A worldwide, circular mountain range made up of shifting elemental aspected crystals and minerals.
15: Daylight Woods: A forest where every tree, plant, fruit and beast emits a bioluminescent glow of varying intensity.
16: Yesterday's Graveyard: An island chain made of the calcified remains of long dead creatures.
17: Liquid Diamond Mines: Natural pools and lakes of liquid minerals, such as diamond or ruby, that lead down to cavern rivers and grottos. In larger pools, this liquid can evaporate and cause localized mineral rainstorms.
18: Shattering Sky: Due to aberrant gaseous dispersal in the atmosphere, or a curse, during the sunset the sky looks to crack and fracture like a broken glass pane until the sun goes down.
19: Enmity Growth: Plants that look like emasciated people until they absorb water and engorge. The plants then appear to emit vitality and look to the untrained eye like a person. They are brittle when dry but this material serves as excellent lumber when engorged and harvested. The engorged tree oozes a blood-like sap when being cut and the unprepared can walk away from the experience feeling like they have killed someone rather than harvested a plant.
20: The Choir: Pockets in the landscape of a windy but barren location that creates complex musical sounds as the wind passes through holes, pockets and divets.

Table 12: Technology Development Level (Roll 1d10, match the result to the corresponding number)
1: Stone Age
2: Bronze Age
3: Imperial Roman Age
4: Middle Ages
5: Steam Age
6: Industrial Age
7: Atomic Age
8: Colony Age (Solar System)
9: Gateway Age (Intergalactic System)
10: Energy Age (Hyperspace)

Stone Age

Bronze Age

Imperial Roman Age

Middle Ages

Steam Age

Industrial Age

Atomic Age

Colony Age

Gateway Age

Energy Age

Table 13: Government Type (Roll 1d10, match the result to the corresponding number)
1: Anarchy/None 
2: Hive Mind
3: Confederation
4: Plutocracy/Megacorporation
5: Democracy
6: Colony/Puppet State
7: Feudal
8: Criminal Empire
9: Technocracy
10: Tribe/Clan
11: Theocracy
12: Dictatorship
13: Republic
14: Matriarchy
15: Patriarchy
16: Oligarchy
17: Monarchy
18: Triumvirate
19: Socialist State
20: Regeancy

Table 14: Defining Industries (Roll 1d20 two times, match the result to the corresponding number)
1: Academic
2: Agricultural
3: Exploration
4: High Craft
5: Common Craft
6: Transport
7: High Technology
8: Common Technology
9: High End Trade
10: Common Trade
11: Entertainment
12: Leisure
13: Medical
14: Military
15: Intelligence
16: Raiding
17: None
18: Banditry
19: Piracy
20: Research

Table 15: Virtues and Vices (Roll 1d20 two times, match the result to the corresponding number)
1: Courage
2: Addictive
3: Spiritual
4: Cowardice
5: Materialistic
6: Temperate
7: Witty
8: Pacifistic
9: Tyrannical
10: Honest
11: Melancholy
12: Benevolent
13: Xenophilic
14: Deceptive
15: Decadent
16: Gentle
17: Confrontational
18: Xenophobic
19: Industrious
20: Cruel


 
Athletics
A character can expend a movement action to negate the action penalties that they suffer from taking a run action.
(Profession Athlete: Spending a movement action can negate the action penalties of taking a run or a sprint action)

Bedrock Bitters + Aromatic Acid + Dwarven Decking
Bedrock Bitters + Sweet Sweetwater = Wicked White
Aromatic Acid + Sweet Sweetwater = Alcoholic Beaverage

book 4674214
528
money order
payable to 731
